films adapted from comic books have had plenty of success , whether they're about superheroes ( batman , superman , spawn ) , or geared toward kids ( casper ) or the arthouse crowd ( ghost world ) , but there's never really been a comic book like from hell before . 
for starters , it was created by alan moore ( and eddie campbell ) , who brought the medium to a whole new level in the mid '80s with a 12-part series called the watchmen . 
to say moore and campbell thoroughly researched the subject of jack the ripper would be like saying michael jackson is starting to look a little odd . 
the book ( or " graphic novel , " if you will ) is over 500 pages long and includes nearly 30 more that consist of nothing but footnotes . 
in other words , don't dismiss this film because of its source . 
if you can get past the whole comic book thing , you might find another stumbling block in from hell's directors , albert and allen hughes . 
getting the hughes brothers to direct this seems almost as ludicrous as casting carrot top in , well , anything , but riddle me this : who better to direct a film that's set in the ghetto and features really violent street crime than the mad geniuses behind menace ii society ? 
the ghetto in question is , of course , whitechapel in 1888 london's east end . 
it's a filthy , sooty place where the whores ( called " unfortunates " ) are starting to get a little nervous about this mysterious psychopath who has been carving through their profession with surgical precision . 
when the first stiff turns up , copper peter godley ( robbie coltrane , the world is not enough ) calls in inspector frederick abberline ( johnny depp , blow ) to crack the case . 
abberline , a widower , has prophetic dreams he unsuccessfully tries to quell with copious amounts of absinthe and opium . 
upon arriving in whitechapel , he befriends an unfortunate named mary kelly ( heather graham , say it isn't so ) and proceeds to investigate the horribly gruesome crimes that even the police surgeon can't stomach . 
i don't think anyone needs to be briefed on jack the ripper , so i won't go into the particulars here , other than to say moore and campbell have a unique and interesting theory about both the identity of the killer and the reasons he chooses to slay . 
in the comic , they don't bother cloaking the identity of the ripper , but screenwriters terry hayes ( vertical limit ) and rafael yglesias ( les mis ? rables ) do a good job of keeping him hidden from viewers until the very end . 
it's funny to watch the locals blindly point the finger of blame at jews and indians because , after all , an englishman could never be capable of committing such ghastly acts . 
and from hell's ending had me whistling the stonecutters song from the simpsons for days ( " who holds back the electric car/who made steve guttenberg a star ? " ) . 
don't worry - it'll all make sense when you see it . 
now onto from hell's appearance : it's certainly dark and bleak enough , and it's surprising to see how much more it looks like a tim burton film than planet of the apes did ( at times , it seems like sleepy hollow 2 ) . 
the print i saw wasn't completely finished ( both color and music had not been finalized , so no comments about marilyn manson ) , but cinematographer peter deming ( don't say a word ) ably captures the dreariness of victorian-era london and helped make the flashy killing scenes remind me of the crazy flashbacks in twin peaks , even though the violence in the film pales in comparison to that in the black-and-white comic . 
oscar winner martin childs' ( shakespeare in love ) production design turns the original prague surroundings into one creepy place . 
even the acting in from hell is solid , with the dreamy depp turning in a typically strong performance and deftly handling a british accent . 
ians holm ( joe gould's secret ) and richardson ( 102 dalmatians ) log in great supporting roles , but the big surprise here is graham . 
i cringed the first time she opened her mouth , imagining her attempt at an irish accent , but it actually wasn't half bad . 
the film , however , is all good . 
2 : 00 - r for strong violence/gore , sexuality , language and drug content 

every now and then a movie comes along from a suspect studio , with every indication that it will be a stinker , and to everybody's surprise ( perhaps even the studio ) the film becomes a critical darling . 
mtv films' _election , a high school comedy starring matthew broderick and reese witherspoon , is a current example . 
did anybody know this film existed a week before it opened ? 
the plot is deceptively simple . 
george washington carver high school is having student elections . 
tracy flick ( reese witherspoon ) is an over-achiever with her hand raised at nearly every question , way , way , high . 
mr . " m " ( matthew broderick ) , sick of the megalomaniac student , encourages paul , a popular-but-slow jock to run . 
and paul's nihilistic sister jumps in the race as well , for personal reasons . 
the dark side of such sleeper success is that , because expectations were so low going in , the fact that this was quality stuff made the reviews even more enthusiastic than they have any right to be . 
you can't help going in with the baggage of glowing reviews , which is in contrast to the negative baggage that the reviewers were likely to have . 
_election , a good film , does not live up to its hype . 
what makes _election_ so disappointing is that it contains significant plot details lifted directly from _rushmore_ , released a few months earlier . 
the similarities are staggering : 
tracy flick ( _election_ ) is the president of an extraordinary number of clubs , and is involved with the school play . 
max fischer ( _rushmore_ ) is the president of an extraordinary number of clubs , and is involved with the school play . 
the most significant tension of _election_ is the potential relationship between a teacher and his student . 
the most significant tension of _rushmore_ is the potential relationship between a teacher and his student . 
tracy flick is from a single parent home , which has contributed to her drive . 
max fischer is from a single parent home , which has contributed to his drive . 
the male bumbling adult in _election_ ( matthew broderick ) pursues an extramarital affair , gets caught , and his whole life is ruined . 
he even gets a bee sting . 
the male bumbling adult in _rushmore_ ( bill murray ) pursues an extramarital affair , gets caught , and his whole life is ruined . 
he gets several bee stings . 
and so on . 
what happened ? 
how is it that an individual screenplay ( _rushmore_ ) and a novel ( _election_ ) contain so many significant plot points , and yet both films were probably not even aware of each other , made from two different studios , from a genre ( the high school geeks revenge movie ) that hadn't been fully formed yet ? 
even so , the strengths of _election_ rely upon its fantastic performances from broderick , witherspoon , and newcomer jessica campbell , as paul's anti-social sister , tammy . 
broderick here is playing the mr . rooney role from _ferris bueller_ , and he seems to be having the most fun he's had since then . 
witherspoon is a revelation . 
it's early in the year , it's a comedy , and teenagers have little clout , but for my money , witherspoon deserves an oscar nomination . 
and once campbell's character gets going , like in her fantastic speech in the gymnasium , then you're won over . 
one thing that's been bothering me since i've seen it . 
there is an extraordinary amount of sexuality in this film . 
i suppose that , coming from mtv films , i should expect no less . . . 
but the film starts off light and airy , like a sitcom . 
as the screws tighten , and the tensions mount , alexander payne decides to add elements that , frankly , distract from the story . 
it is bad enough that mr . m doesn't like tracy's determination to win at all costs , but did they have to throw in the student/teacher relationship ? 
even so , there's no logical reason why mr . m has an affair when he does . 
there's a lot to like in _election_ , but the plot similarities to _rushmore_ , and the tonal nosedive it takes as it gets explicitly sex-driven , mark this as a disappointment . 

you've got mail works alot better than it deserves to . 
in order to make the film a success , all they had to do was cast two extremely popular and attractive stars , have them share the screen for about two hours and then collect the profits . 
no real acting was involved and there is not an original or inventive bone in it's body ( it's basically a complete re-shoot of the shop around the corner , only adding a few modern twists ) . 
essentially , it goes against and defies all concepts of good contemporary filmmaking . 
it's overly sentimental and at times terribly mushy , not to mention very manipulative . 
but oh , how enjoyable that manipulation is . 
but there must be something other than the casting and manipulation that makes the movie work as well as it does , because i absolutely hated the previous ryan/hanks teaming , sleepless in seattle . 
it couldn't have been the directing , because both films were helmed by the same woman . 
i haven't quite yet figured out what i liked so much about you've got mail , but then again , is that really important ? 
if you like something so much , why even question it ? 
again , the storyline is as cliched as they come . 
tom hanks plays joe fox , the insanely likeable owner of a discount book chain and meg ryan plays kathleen kelley , the even more insanely likeable proprietor of a family-run children's book shop called , in a nice homage , the shop around the corner . 
fox and kelley soon become bitter rivals because the new fox books store is opening up right across the block from the small business . 
little do they know , they are already in love with each other over the internet , only neither party knows the other person's true identity . 
the rest of the story isn't important because all it does is serve as a mere backdrop for the two stars to share the screen . 
sure , there are some mildly interesting subplots , but they all fail in comparison to the utter cuteness of the main relationship . 
all of this , of course , leads up to the predictable climax . 
but as foreseeable as the ending is , it's so damn cute and well-done that i doubt any movie in the entire year contains a scene the evokes as much pure joy as this part does . 
when ryan discovers the true identity of her online love , i was filled with such , for lack of a better word , happiness that for the first time all year , i actually left the theater smiling . 


 " jaws " is a rare film that grabs your attention before it shows you a single image on screen . 
the movie opens with blackness , and only distant , alien-like underwater sounds . 
then it comes , the first ominous bars of composer john williams' now infamous score . 
dah-dum . 
from there , director steven spielberg wastes no time , taking us into the water on a midnight swim with a beautiful girl that turns deadly . 
right away he lets us know how vulnerable we all are floating in the ocean , and once " jaws " has attacked , it never relinquishes its grip . 
perhaps what is most outstanding about " jaws " is how spielberg builds the movie . 
he works it like a theatrical production , with a first act and a second act . 
unlike so many modern filmmakers , he has a great deal of restraint , and refuses to show us the shark until the middle of the second act . 
until then , he merely suggests its presence with creepy , subjective underwater shots and williams' music . 
he's building the tension bit by bit , so when it comes time for the climax , the shark's arrival is truly terrifying . 
he doesn't let us get bored with the imagery . 
the first act opens with police chief martin brody ( roy scheider ) , a new york cop who has taken an easy , peaceful job running the police station on amity island , a fictitious new england resort town where there hasn't been a murder or a gun fired in 25 years . 
the island is shaken up by several vicious great white shark attacks right before the fourth of july , and the mayor , larry vaughn ( murray hamilton ) , doesn't want to shut down the beaches because the island is reliant on summer tourist money . 
brody is joined by matt hooper ( richard dreyfuss ) , a young , ambitious shark expert from the marine institute . 
hooper is as fascinated by the shark as he is determined to help brody stop it -- his knowledge about the exact workings of the shark ( " it's a perfect engine , an eating machine " ) make it that much more terrifying . 
when vaughn finally relents , hooper and brody join a crusty old shark killer named quint ( robert shaw ) on his decrepit boat , the orca , to search for the shark . 
the entire second act takes place on the orca as the three men hunt the shark , and inevitably , are hunted by it . 
 " jaws " is a thriller with a keen sense of humor and an incredible sense of pacing , tension , and horror . 
it is like ten movies all rolled into one , and it's no wonder it took america by storm in the summer of 1975 , taking in enough money to crown it the box office champ of all time ( until it was unceremoniously dethroned in 1977 by " star wars " ) . 
even today , fascination with this film is on par with hitchcock's " psycho , " and it never seems to age . 
although grand new technology exists that makes the technical sequences , including several mechanical sharks , obsolete , none of it could improve the film because it only would lead to overkill . 
the technical limitations faced by spielberg in 1975 may have actually produced a better film because it forced him to rely on traditional cinematic elements like pacing , characterization , sharp editing , and creative photography , instead of simply dousing the audience with digital shark effects . 
scheider , dreyfuss , and shaw were known actors at the time " jaws " was made , but none of them had the draw of a robert redford or paul newman . 
nevertheless , this film guaranteed them all successful careers because each gave an outstanding performance and refused to be overshadowed by the shark . 
scheider hits just the right notes as a sympathetic husband and father caught in the political quagmire of doing what's right and going against the entire town . 
 " it's your first summer here , you know , " mayor vaughn warns him . 
dreyfuss , who had previously been seen in " american graffiti " ( 1973 ) and " the apprenticeship of duddy kravitz " ( 1974 ) gives a surprisingly mature , complex performance for someone who had literally only played kids and teenagers . 
however , most outstanding is the gnarled performance by robert shaw as the movie's captain ahab , a performance sorely overlooked by the academy awards . 
bordering of parody , shaw plays quint as a grizzled old loner whose machismo borders on masochism . 
he's slightly deranged , and shaw's performance is almost a caricature . 
however , there is one scene late in the film , when he and brody and hooper are below deck on the orca comparing scars . 
quint is drawn into telling the story of his experiences aboard the u . s . s . 
indianapolis , a navy ship in world war ii that was sunk by the japanese . 
his tale of floating in the water for more than a week with over 1 , 000 other men while swarms of sharks slowly devoured them them is actually more hair-raising than anything spielberg put on screen . 
shaw delivers the story in one long take , and it is the best acting in the film . 
of course , we can't leave out the shark itself ; with its black eyes , endless rows of teeth , and insatiable urge to eat , it is basically the epitome of all mankind's fears about what is unknown and threatening in nature . 
a shark is such a perfect nemesis it is real -- having survived sinch the dinosaurs , great whites do exist , they can be as large as the shark in " jaws , " and they are a threat . 
every one of spielberg's subjective underwater shots makes us feel queasy because lets us see how we look to the shark : a bunch of writihing , dangling , completely unprotected legs just ready to be chomped into . 
the shark in " jaws " was actually a combination of actual footage and five different mechanical sharks ( all nicknamed " bruce " by the crew ) built to be shot from different angles . 
many have forgotten , but " jaws " was a sort of precursor to " waterworld " ( 1995 ) , a movie's who soggy production and cost overruns had universal studios worried about a bomb . 
but , as we can see now , spielberg overcame all the obstacles , and delivered one of the finest primal scare-thrillers ever to come out of hollywood . 


moviemaking is a lot like being the general manager of an nfl team in the post-salary cap era -- you've got to know how to allocate your resources . 
every dollar spent on a free-agent defensive tackle is one less dollar than you can spend on linebackers or safeties or centers . 
in the nfl , this leads to teams like the detroit lions , who boast a superstar running back with a huge contract , but can only field five guys named herb to block for him . 
in the movies , you end up with films like " spawn " , with a huge special-effects budget but not enough money to hire any recognizable actors . 
jackie chan is the barry sanders of moviemaking . 
he spins and darts across the screen like sanders cutting back through the defensive line . 
watching jackie in operation condor as he drives his motorcycle through the crowded streets of madrid , fleeing an armada of pursuers in identical black compact cars , is reminiscent of sanders running for daylight with the chicago bears in hot pursuit , except that sanders doesn't have to worry about rescuing runaway baby carriages . 
but like the lions star , jackie doesn't have anybody to block for him . 
almost every cent that's invested in a jackie chan movie goes for stunts , and as chan does his own stunts , the rest of the money goes to pay his hospital bills . 
this leaves about 75 cents to pay for things like directors ( chan directs ) , scripts and dubbing and supporting characters , not to mention the hideous title sequence . 
this also explains why the movie was shot in odd places like morocco and spain . 
 ( chan's first release in this country , " rumble in the bronx " , was supposedly set in new york , but was filmed in vancouver , and in the chase scenes the canadian rockies are clearly visible . ) 
heck , jackie doesn't even have enough money for a haircut , looks like , much less a personal hairstylist . 
in condor , chan plays the same character he's always played , himself , a mixture of bruce lee and tim allen , a master of both kung-fu and slapstick-fu . 
jackie is sent by the un to retrieve a cache of lost nazi gold in the north african desert , and is chased by a horde of neo-nazi sympathizers and two stereotypical arabs ( one of the things i like about jackie chan movies : no political correctness ) . 
he is joined by three women , who have little to do except scream , " jackie , save us ! " , and misuse firearms . 
the villain is an old nazi whose legs were broken in the secret base so that he has to be carried everywhere , and he's more pathetic than evil . 
en route , we have an extended motorcycle chase scene , a hilarious fight in the moroccan version of motel 6 with the neo-nazis , and two confrontations with savage natives . 
once at the secret desert base , there is a long chop-socky sequence , followed by the film's centerpiece , a wind-tunnel fight that's even better than the one in face/off . 
this is where the money was spent , on well-choreographed kung-fu sequences , on giant kevlar hamster balls , on smashed-up crates of bananas , and on scorpions . 
ignore the gaping holes in the plot ( how , exactly , if the villain's legs were broken , did he escape from the secret nazi base , and why didn't he take the key with him ? ) . 
don't worry about the production values , or what , exactly , the japanese girl was doing hitchhiking across the sahara . 
just go see the movie . 
operation condor has pretentions of being a " raiders of the lost ark " knockoff , but one wonders what jackie could do with the raiders franchise blocking for him -- with a lawrence kazdan screenplay , a john williams score , spielberg directing and george lucas producing , condor might be an a+ movie . 
however , you've got to go with what you've got , and what you've got in jackie chan is something special -- a talent that mainstream hollywood should , could , and ought to utilize . 

on june 30 , 1960 , a self-taught , idealistic , yet pragmatic , young man became , at age 36 , the first head of government of a newly independent african state , formerly the belgian congo . 
two months later , he was ousted from his powerful position and hunted by government troops until he was captured and brutally murdered along with two aides . 
this little-known story of this meteoric rise and fall is told my international filmmaker raoul peck in " lumumba . " 
patrice lumumba's ( eriq ebouaney ) story has been told previously by helmer peck in his 1991 award winning documentary , " lumumba - death of a prophet , " virtually guaranteeing that his new , fictional account of a patriot remains true to its subject . 
peck , with co-writer pascal bonitzer , begins at the end of the story of the young political leader . 
we watch as two white men perform the gruesome task of dismembering the bodies of three black men . 
images of hatchets , saws and fast-emptying whiskey bottles accompany the grisly image . 
jump back a few years to a meeting among the black leaders in the belgian-owned congo . 
a third class postal worker , lumumba , speaks his mind to heads of the most powerful tribes , proclaiming himself not tribal , not regional , but a national leader . 
his small , mobile party , the congolese national movement ( mnc ) is gaining prominence and patrice leaves his clerical job to sell beer , and get his face known , in the bustling capital , stanleyville . 
at a time when the colonial empires are falling down around the world , lumumba is in the right place at the right time and , through political savvy and chess-like manipulation , achieves a position of leadership of the mnc . 
as the date for independence approaches , he tactically positions himself to be the new nation's first prime minister and defense minister , supporting the presidency of joseph kasa vubu ( maka kotto ) . 
the coalition he created soon starts to fall apart as the former belgian masters continue to exert influence on the struggling nation as they strive to maintain economic hold on the country's vast natural resources of copper , diamonds , gold and more . 
lumumba won't seek the help of the us , knowing that they would try to create de facto american control of the fledgling government . 
his initial investigation into soviet assistance immediately tags patrice as a communist and his integrity is overshadowed by the cold war threat of russian domination . 
the situation goes from bad to worse as the army mutinies , the remaining whites begin to evacuate or arm themselves , belgian troops violently intervene , the lucrative katanga province succeeds under the leadership of rival moise tschombe ( pascal nzonzi ) and lumumba is refused access to his own country when he returns from a conference abroad . 
this tumultuous and little known period of modern african history saw a score of nations struggling for independence from the sometimes-odious colonialists who have ruled much of the world from their european seats of power for centuries . 
peck focuses his story on familiar material that strives to give an honest portrayal of patrice lumumba , his friend and foes and the independence movements that gripped africa in the 50's and 60's . 
 ( during the time the story takes place , many new nations , including nigeria and somalia , were born , with varying degrees of success and failure , usually dependent upon which country colonized them . 
some colonial masters were better than others . ) 
the effort involved in " lumumba " is quite ambitious as peck and his crew before and behind the camera strive to bring to life this slice of world history that might have gone unexplored for decades , if at all . 
production values are first rate on what must be a small , by us standards , budget . 
the period feel and realistic african settings are nicely maintained in a production that traveled from zimbabwe to mozambique . 
the screenplay covers a lot of ground and does yeoman's work in providing a great deal of detailed history while trying to do justice to the story of lumumba's life . 
the political side of things is evenly told in a linear , straightforward manner that teaches , not preaches . 
it concentrates on the good deeds of the man , if a bit as a stalwart saint , but doesn't embellish on a larger than life persona . 
the family side of patrice's life is handled in several , perfunctory and brief interludes that show him talking to one of his children , embracing his wife or lamenting the death of his child . 
i know the intent is to flesh the man out , but too short a shrift is given to the family man side of lumumba . 
the story , as such , has a lopsided feel about it . 
high marks go to eriq ebouaney as the title character . 
the actor gives a convincing , charismatic performance as the multifaceted , politically deft patrice lumumba who has the good of his people and his country as the force driving his own ambitions . 
in true docudrama tradition , the supporting cast does not outshine the star , complementing his good efforts , instead . 
 " lumumba " is a solid , interesting , educational and honest docudrama that should appeal to film buffs and politicos , both . 
it has more intelligence in its telling than anything i've seen out of hollywood for months and i give it a b+ . 

apparently , director tony kaye had a major battle with new line regarding his new film , american history x . i don't know the details of the fight , but it seems that he is not happy with the final product , and nearly removed his name from the credits altogether . 
i've heard about this kind of thing happening before , and it makes me wonder how much input a studio has over the films they produce . 
as it is , i found american history x to be an extremely good film , not just because of tony kaye's focused look at the touchy subject of racism , but because of a powerful , charismatic performance from edward norton . 
it's hard to believe that it has only been two years since norton's fantastic role in primal fear , but , here he is now , starring in his own film and making himself a star . 
norton is one of those performers who becomes his character , and his work in american history x is one of the very best performances this year . 
he plays a young man named derek vinyard , a skinhead living in venice beach with his brother , danny ( edward furlong ) , mother ( beverly d'angelo ) , and sister , davin ( jennifer lien ) . 
the film opens with a flashback , in which derek brutally kills two black men vandalizing his car . 
we find out that this lands him in prison , and the film from that point is seen through the eyes of danny . 
in the present-time of the film , danny is in high school , and eager to follow the footsteps of his brother . 
much of the film is told in flashback , and we see the path that leads to derek's adoption of white supremacy . 
when derek is released , having served three years in prison , he finds that his brother is now a full-blown skinhead ; derek , however , has given up the violence , and tries to get his brother to understand why racism and the violence that comes with it are bad things . 
what makes this all interesting is that these two young men are not stupid , thoughtless people -- they are intelligent and articulate , and voice their beliefs in disturbingly straightforward terms . 
it's hard to make a controversial movie and not preach , but kaye has found the right note for his material . 
because american history x is a mainstream film , there has to be a redemption phase for our main character -- some people may think that this is the only way to make him sympathetic . 
i partially disagree with this , because , although i do not advocate racism in any way , it's interesting the way kaye presents derek -- he is a loud , obnoxious man , but he's also very smart . 
the reasons for why he becomes a skinhead are believable -- his father was arbitrarily killed by a group of black men . 
it's clear that he's passionate about his beliefs , and that he's not just a punk looking for an excuse to beat people up . 
of course , it helps that kaye has an actor as talented as norton to play this part . 
it's astonishing how frightening norton looks with a shaved head and a swastika on his chest . 
in addition to getting the look just right , he's perfect for this role -- derek requires intelligence , depth , and a whole lot of shouting , and norton does it all with ease . 
even when he's at his meanest , derek has a likable quality to him , and that's a gutsy approach when telling a story about a skinhead . 
what adds depth to the story is a subplot in which the principal of danny's school ( avery brooks ) becomes obsessed with purging the hatred from danny . 
the other performances are all terrific , with standouts from furlong , d'angelo , and lien . 
visually , the film is very powerful . 
kaye indulges in a lot of interesting artistic choices , and most of them work nicely -- lots of slow-motion and strange camera angles add to a moody atmosphere . 
but , like a lot of movies lately , american history x skims past greatness in the last few minutes . 
although the climactic scene is very moving , the picture ends with a pretentious , preachy resolution featuring a brief narration from a character who was killed . 
for a movie so smart a subtle up until that point , it felt like a slap in the face to be hand-fed a theme in such a simplistic way . 
it makes me wonder what , exactly , tony kaye disliked about the final version of his film . 
perhaps this last scene was the problem . 
it's hard to imagine any director not being at least partially pleased with a film this good -- in a time when so many movies are timid and weak , american history x manages to make a compelling argument for racism without advocating it any way . 

one of my colleagues was surprised when i told her i was willing to see betsy's wedding . 
and she was shocked to hear that i actually liked it . 
her reaction was understandable when you consider that the film revolves around molly ringwald , who hasn't made a worthwhile film since 1986 . 
but the fact is , betsy's wedding is also an alan alda film . 
and while ringwald has been making duds for the last four years , alda has been involved with several noteworthy projects , including crimes and misdemeanors and a new life . 
written and directed by alda , betsy's wedding is a vibrant slice-of-life , mixing a few dramatic moments into a big bowl of whimsical humor . 
alda's comic elixir is smooth and refreshing--and a welcome change of pace from the usual summer fare . 
as bride and groom , molly ringwald and dylan walsh are the pivotal characters in the film , but they are by far the least interesting . 
walsh is a nonentity , with all the screen presence of a door knob . 
ringwald is simply unbearable and is easily the weakest link in the chain . 
she looks hideous with her short-cropped orange hair , red lip-stick and grotesque outfits . 
she's supposed to be a dress designer , but she looks more like a clown . 
and to make matters worse , ringwald's performance matches her appearance . 
thankfully , alda keeps ringwald's screen time to a minimum ; he is far more interested in the colorful periphery characters . 
the wedding is just a device to bring together the bride's working-class , italian family and the groom's rich , gentile family . 
ringwald's folks are homey and down-to-earth , with alda as her free-spirited father , madeline kahn as her practical mother , and ally sheedy as her lonely sister . 
walsh's clan , on the other hand , is prim , proper and ostentatious . 
when the two families meet and mingle , the movie becomes a story of culture clash , or as one character puts it , " money versus values . " 
ally sheedy , in a wonderfully understated performance , is one of the film's most pleasant surprises . 
sheedy expresses more with just her eyes than ringwald does with her entire body . 
it's anthony lapaglia , however , who seizes the spotlight . 
lapaglia plays stevie dee , a suave , overly polite mafioso who is formally courting sheedy with old-fashioned chivalry . 
lapaglia's sincere but dim-witted character is a riot . 
and what's uncanny is that lapaglia is a dead ringer for robert de niro , with a little bit of alec baldwin thrown in for good measure . 
lapaglia seems to have attended the de niro school of gangster acting , and his inspired performance is partly a tribute to his role-model and partly a rip-off . 
i don't know whether to say a star is born or a star is re-born , but i do know that lapaglia's over-the-top performance should not be missed . 
the scrumptious comic acting , however , extends well beyond sheedy and lapaglia . 
joe pesci , in particular , sinks his teeth into his role as alda's unscrupulous brother-in-law , a slum lord with mob ties , who is cheating on his wife ( catherine o'hara ) . 
alda , faced with challenge of both directing and acting , somehow finds just the right comic touch as the bride's financially-strapped father , a carpenter whose dreams are bigger than his wallet . 
the film adopts alda's psychological point of view as he tries to one : plan the wedding , and two : pay for it . 
as a filmmaker , alda's style of humor is remarkably restrained and tasteful . 
and while he doesn't have the comic genius of a woody allen , alda does possess the inspiration to make movies which are ten times more entertaining than the slop which usually passes for comedy . 

one of my colleagues was surprised when i told her i was willing to see betsy's wedding . 
and she was shocked to hear that i actually liked it . 
her reaction was understandable when you consider that the film revolves around molly ringwald , who hasn't made a worthwhile film since 1986 . 
but the fact is , betsy's wedding is also an alan alda film . 
and while ringwald has been making duds for the last four years , alda has been involved with several noteworthy projects , including crimes and misdemeanors and a new life . 
written and directed by alda , betsy's wedding is a vibrant slice-of-life , mixing a few dramatic moments into a big bowl of whimsical humor . 
alda's comic elixir is smooth and refreshing--and a welcome change of pace from the usual summer fare . 
as bride and groom , molly ringwald and dylan walsh are the pivotal characters in the film , but they are by far the least interesting . 
walsh is a nonentity , with all the screen presence of a door knob . 
ringwald is simply unbearable and is easily the weakest link in the chain . 
she looks hideous with her short-cropped orange hair , red lip-stick and grotesque outfits . 
she's supposed to be a dress designer , but she looks more like a clown . 
and to make matters worse , ringwald's performance matches her appearance . 
thankfully , alda keeps ringwald's screen time to a minimum ; he is far more interested in the colorful periphery characters . 
the wedding is just a device to bring together the bride's working-class , italian family and the groom's rich , gentile family . 
ringwald's folks are homey and down-to-earth , with alda as her free-spirited father , madeline kahn as her practical mother , and ally sheedy as her lonely sister . 
walsh's clan , on the other hand , is prim , proper and ostentatious . 
when the two families meet and mingle , the movie becomes a story of culture clash , or as one character puts it , " money versus values . " 
ally sheedy , in a wonderfully understated performance , is one of the film's most pleasant surprises . 
sheedy expresses more with just her eyes than ringwald does with her entire body . 
it's anthony lapaglia , however , who seizes the spotlight . 
lapaglia plays stevie dee , a suave , overly polite mafioso who is formally courting sheedy with old-fashioned chivalry . 
lapaglia's sincere but dim-witted character is a riot . 
and what's uncanny is that lapaglia is a dead ringer for robert de niro , with a little bit of alec baldwin thrown in for good measure . 
lapaglia seems to have attended the de niro school of gangster acting , and his inspired performance is partly a tribute to his role-model and partly a rip-off . 
i don't know whether to say a star is born or a star is re-born , but i do know that lapaglia's over-the-top performance should not be missed . 
the scrumptious comic acting , however , extends well beyond sheedy and lapaglia . 
joe pesci , in particular , sinks his teeth into his role as alda's unscrupulous brother-in-law , a slum lord with mob ties , who is cheating on his wife ( catherine o'hara ) . 
alda , faced with challenge of both directing and acting , somehow finds just the right comic touch as the bride's financially-strapped father , a carpenter whose dreams are bigger than his wallet . 
the film adopts alda's psychological point of view as he tries to one : plan the wedding , and two : pay for it . 
as a filmmaker , alda's style of humor is remarkably restrained and tasteful . 
and while he doesn't have the comic genius of a woody allen , alda does possess the inspiration to make movies which are ten times more entertaining than the slop which usually passes for comedy . 
after bloody clashes and independence won , lumumba refused to pander to the belgians , who continued a condescending and paternalistic relationship with the congo . 
their officers , particularly general janssens ( rudi delhem ) in the force publique , the congo's army , caused rebellions , undermining lumumba , who was outraged at the rape and murder of belgian nationals . 
with unrest building , moise tshombe ( pascal nzonzi ) and the province of katanga , which contained 70 percent of the country's resources , proclaimed secession . 
lumumba replaced janssens , making mobutu a colonel , and went on a pacification 
tour with congolese president joseph kasa vubu ( maka kotto ) , but it was too late . 
'when you want to drown a dog , you say it has rabies , ' prophesies lumumba of his own fate . 
peck and bonitzer do an exemplary job telling a complicated tale with a myriad of players , although they frequently succumb to cliche , particularly regarding lumumba's private life . 
peck's script illuminates bantu sayings like 'the hand that gives , rules' when lumumba uses it with the american ambassador . 
peck's direction is less assured , with many scenes unfortunately playing like standard television fare . 
he's served well , though , by his casting of ebouaney in the title role . 
ebouaney is dynamic , radiating his character's fierce passion for his people and his country . 
lumumba's intelligence and ability to strategize , even as he's cornered by insurmountable odds , are given life by ebouaney . 
peck's subject and lead actor elevate his film above its mediocre production . 
 " lumumba " is a story that deserves to be told and ebouaney's performance makes the tragedy personally felt . 

the american action film has been slowly drowning to death in a sea of asian wire-fu copycats . 
it's not a pretty death , and it's leaving the likes of schwartznager , stallone , and van damme wearing cement galoshes at the bottom of a kung fu sea . 
sometimes , the mix results in a mind-blowing spectacle unlike any other . 
quality action with amazing and exciting stunt work , as in 1999's the matrix , can be a real gem . 
but too often hollywood gets it wrong , even when they pay off chinese directors . 
flying ninjas and floating karate masters have been replaced by soaring bronx detectives and slow motion kicking scientists . 
mostly it's laughable . 
in hollywood's rush to emulate the success of the matrix , trademark asian stunt choreography has become more of a joke than an art form . 
but iron monkey , the latest asian import , shows us how to get it right . 
iron monkey ( actually a reissue of a 1993 film ) is the story of a 19th chinese vigilante ( rongguang yu ) , fighting with his own unique style of shaolin kung fu for the rights of the oppressed and the bellies of the hungry . 
but it is also a piece of the narrative of legendary chinese film hero wong fei-hong , most recently seen in one of the most overlooked , and possibly best films of 2000 , drunken master 2 ( released in the u . s . as the legend of drunken master ) . 
unlike drunken master 2 , which stars jackie chan as an adult fei-hong , iron monkey finds a much younger fei-hong ( sze-man tsang ) and his father wong kei-ying ( yen chi dan ) thrust into the middle of iron monkey's fight against oppression . 
iron monkey succeeds as no kung fu film since drunken master 2 . at times , fighting styles , especially that of monkey himself , do devolve into the ridiculous twinkle-toed floating of films like crouching tiger , hidden dragon , director yuen wo ping eventually remembers to bring his action scenes back to earth . 
iron monkey is at its heart a hardcore , kung fu action film rather than any kind of drama a la crouching tiger . 
however , there are brief moments of profoundness shared between characters , such as those that pass between our outlaw hero and his good-hearted but misguided enemy , chief fox . 
in those moments , and in others , iron monkey manages to transcend its mindless kung fu nature to touch the hearts and minds of its audience . 
while in no way the equal of a masterpiece like drunken master 2 , iron monkey dances quite nicely to the invading kung fu tune . 
aka siunin wong fei-hung tsi titmalau . 
